[docs] Separate "Visibility and getters" section for state variables and functions (#11999)
ethereum/solidity: docs/contracts/visibility-and-getters.rst

.. index:: ! visibility, external, public, private, internal

> .. |visibility-caveat| replace:: Making something ``private`` or ``internal`` only prevents other contracts from reading or modifying the information, but it will still be visible to the whole world outside of the blockchain.

Reviewer: Nice. I didn't even know that RST allowed something like that!

.. index:: ! visibility, external, public, private, internal

.. |visibility-caveat| replace:: Making something ``private`` or ``internal`` only prevents other contracts from reading or modifying the information, but it will still be visible to the whole world outside of the blockchain.

.. _visibility-and-getters:

**********************
Visibility and Getters
**********************

State Variable Visibility
=========================

``public``
    Public state variables differ from internal ones only in that the compiler automatically generates
    :ref:`getter functions<getter-functions>` for them, which allows other contracts to read their values.
    When used within the same contract, the external access (e.g. ``this.x``) invokes the getter
    while internal access (e.g. ``x``) gets the variable value directly from storage.
    Setter functions are not generated so other contracts cannot directly modify their values.

``internal``

>     Internal state variables can only be accessed from within the contract where they are defined in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Internal state variables can only be accessed from within the contract they are defined in
```

    and in derived contracts.
    They cannot be accessed externally.
    This is the default visibility level for state variables.

``private``
    Private state variables are only visible for the contract they are defined in and not in derived contracts.
    They cannot be accessed externally.

.. warning::
    |visibility-caveat|

Function Visibility
===================

> Solidity knows two kinds of function calls: external ones that do create an actual EVM message call and internal ones that do not. Furthermore, functions can be inherited or not inherited by derived contracts. This gives rise to four types of visibility for functions.

Reviewer: This line is a whole paragraph. I'd suggest wrapping at the end of each sentence.
```suggestion
Solidity knows two kinds of function calls: external ones that do create an actual EVM message call and internal ones that do not.
Furthermore, functions can be inherited or not inherited by derived contracts.
This gives rise to four types of visibility for functions.
```

> Solidity knows two kinds of function calls: external ones that do create an actual EVM message call and internal ones that do not. Furthermore, functions can be inherited or not inherited by derived contracts. This gives rise to four types of visibility for functions.

Reviewer: Technically, private functions are still inherited (their code is present in the derived contract if they are used). They just can't be called directly from the derived contract.

Also the wording suggests to me that you can have 4 combinations (external inherited, external not inherited, internal inherited, internal not inherited) but it's not exactly like that.

How about this?
```suggestion
Solidity knows two kinds of function calls: external ones that do create an actual EVM message call and internal ones that do not.
Furthermore, internal functions can be made inaccessible to derived contracts.
This gives rise to four types of visibility for functions.
```

Visibility and Getters
**********************

> Solidity knows two kinds of function calls: internal

Reviewer 2: I think we should not delete this paragraph, it explains what internal and external calls are and that is important for what follows.

Author: The reason why I decided to remove this paragraph is (1) because external / internal function calls are briefly described in visibility descriptions (e.g. in `external` function description) and (2) because of `Because of that, there are four types of visibility for functions and state variables.` sentence - it is not obvious why two call types produce four visibility types.

But looking with a fresh eye I agree that we should provide some note on external / internal function calls. It'll be useful for newcomers. I see at least two options here: (1) we can leave only the first sentence or (2) we can provide more information to explain how two call types produce four visibility types.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, maybe the `because` can be changed to something like "connected to this".  I think there should at least be an introductory sentence that says something like there are four visibilities and they are connected to the way functions are called.

Author: Thank you for the reply 😃 I'll continue to work on the PR after I'll return back home from a vacation

Author: I've returned the paragraph and rephrased it a bit at 1fed766.

    Everything that is inside a contract is visible to
    all observers external to the blockchain. Making something ``private``
    only prevents other contracts from reading or modifying
    the information, but it will still be visible to the

>     whole world outside of the blockchain.

Reviewer: It seems odd to me to put this before listing all the visibility options. I'd put it after `private` description in one of the sections below.

Author: I agree that putting the note after `private` description looks natural (after all, the note introduces the caveat so one should learn the concept first and then the caveat). However, the reason why I decided to put it before is the note refers to both state variables and functions. I'm afraid that if we put it after `private` description one may think that the note refers only to state variables or only to functions. What are your thoughts on this concern?

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can shrink this note a bit (i.e. only the first sentence) and just put it at the end of both "private" paragraphs?

Author: Sound good, here are changes c5a5c076e

State Variables Visibility

> ==========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
State Variable Visibility
=========================
```

``public``
    For public state variables, an automatic

>     :ref:`getter function<getter-functions>` is generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Public state variables differ from internal ones only in that the compiler automatically generates
    :ref:`getter functions<getter-functions>` for them, which allows other contracts to read their values.
    When used within the same contract, the external access (e.g. ``this.x``) invokes the getter
    while internal access (e.g. ``x``) gets the variable value directly from storage.
    Setter functions are not generated so other contracts cannot directly modify their values.
```

``internal``
    Internal state variables can only be
    accessed from within the current contract
    or contracts deriving from it, without using ``this``.

>     This is the default visibility level for state variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Internal state variables can only be accessed from within the contract where they are defined in
    and in derived contracts.
    They cannot be accessed externally.
    This is the default visibility level for state variables.
```

``private``
    Private state variables are only visible for the contract

>     they are defined in and not in derived contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Private state variables are only visible for the contract they are defined in and not in derived contracts.
    They cannot be accessed externally.
```

Functions Visibility

> ====================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Function Visibility
===================
```

``public``
    Public functions are part of the contract interface
    and can be either called internally or via message calls.

``internal``
    Internal functions can only be accessed from within the current contract

>     or contracts deriving from it, without using ``this``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    or contracts deriving from it.
    They cannot be accessed externally.
```

``private``
    Private functions are only visible for the contract

>     they are defined in and not in derived contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Private functions are only visible for the contract they are defined in and not in derived contracts.
    They cannot be accessed externally.
```

``public``
    Public functions are part of the contract interface
    and can be either called internally or via message calls.

``internal``
    Internal functions can only be accessed from within the current contract
    or contracts deriving from it.
    They cannot be accessed externally.
    They can use internal types like mappings as parameters.

``private``
    Private functions are only visible for the contract they are defined in and not in derived contracts.

>     They cannot be accessed externally.

Reviewer: Update to match https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/pull/11999/files#r744680506.
```suggestion
    They cannot be accessed externally and can use internal types for parameters.
```
Maybe it would be better to just say that they're like ``internal`` ones but not visible in derived contracts to avoid repeating stuff.

``public``
    Public functions are part of the contract interface
    and can be either called internally or via message calls.

``internal``
    Internal functions can only be accessed from within the current contract
    or contracts deriving from it.

>     They cannot be accessed externally.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can add here: "They can use internal types like mappings as parameters."?

Reviewer: How about this?
```suggestion
    They cannot be accessed externally.
    Since they are not exposed to the outside through the contract's ABI, they can take parameters of internal types like mappings or storage references.
```

Reviewer: We should probably also mention this for state variables. For example you cannot define this:
```solidity
contract C {
    function() internal public x;
}
```
but this is legal:
```solidity
contract C {
    function() external public y;
}
```
It's just that mappings do not have that problem because getters skip them and storage references are not allowed as storage variables.
